# Introduction

import { Box, Text, Container, SimpleGrid } from '@chakra-ui/react';
import StaffMember from '../../src/components/StaffMember';
import staff from '../../src/data/staff';


## Welcome to [Web Development at Berkeley](https://webatberkeley.org/)'s Introduction to Full-Stack Development DeCal!

Welcome! Learning a new skill set, whether you're a seasoned developer or an
interested beginner, can always be a daunting task. Full-stack web development,
with its many aspects, facets, and tools can be especially daunting to
newcomers, and having years of programming experience may not necessarily help
you if you're never learned these tools or the skillset required to be a
developer before. This is going to be a long journey, but by the end of our
curriculum, you'll have a solid grasp of web development (hopefully), along with
an introduction to tech culture, the tech community, and the tools you need to
succeed in any engineering-related role.

At times it may feel as if all you're learning is what to google, or what tech
YouTubers to watch to solve a problem, or even how to say big words without
understanding their meaning - we're here to tell you that that's perfectly
normal. If you ever feel out of place, or that you may not be up to the
challenge, I can assure you that we've all felt that way at some point in time.
Every programmer in their learning journey has had moments where they've
wondered if they were cut out for the job, but what separated the ones who
succeeded and the ones who didn't were making sure that those thoughts didn't
stop them from achieving their goals.

:::tip

Hey there! Full-Stack Development is super difficult, and it takes most people
1-2 years before they're able to truly understand the field well. Don't be
afraid to ask questions and just keep plodding forward. Trust in the process and
it'll all make sense eventually!

:::

## Tips to Succeed In This Course

Contrary to what many people believe, you do not have to be a wizard with math
to write code. The two subjects share some overlap but also are quite different.
Many artists, lawyers, historians, linguists, and others have great success
learning how to code. Don't let those preconceived notions hold you back at all.

Also keep in mind that this is _hard_. Learning how to code is hard. It's
similar to learning a foreign language where you have to learn a lot of small
pieces of information to be able to make sense of the larger picture. It's easy
to feel discouraged, especially when you feel like you _should_ get something
but don't. Keep your head up and keep trying. Walk away from the problem and
come back later. Try explaining your problem to someone / your dog / a
[rubber ducky](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rubber_duck_debugging) (seriously,
it works.)

Never feel afraid to Google _anything_. Every programmer you know, from the top
person in the field to the newest student is Googling things _constantly_. This
isn't cheating; it's a skill. It's a requirement. There is so much information
coming at you that cannot possibly remember it all. Copy and paste code. Look at
[StackOverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/). Ask dumb questions. You get better
by repeatedly exposing yourself to information. Each time a bit more will sink
in.

Don't try to understand every piece all at once. There are times where it's okay
to just trust that something works and come back later to understand how. It's a
tough balance because you do want to try to understand what's going on. I'll try
to signal to you what's worth diving into and what's worth leaving for another
day but just know you don't have to understand it all at once.

Lastly, this isn't a get-rich-quick scheme. Learning to code is hard and
requires a lot of hard work. While entry-level jobs are out there and you can
get them with months of work, I guarantee you'll have to work hard for them.

## Your TA's for this semester

<SimpleGrid columns={[1, null, 2]} spacing={[12, 16]}>
  {staff.map(({ name, image, role, linkedin, personal, bio, email }) => (
    <StaffMember
      name={name}
      image={image}
      role={role}
      linkedin={linkedin}
      personal={personal}
      bio={bio}
      email={email}
      key={name}
    />
  ))}
</SimpleGrid>

## Why was this course created?

I firmly believe that web development is an indispensable skill in today's
online society. Every idea, organization, and initiative needs some sort of
online presence in order to grow and succeed, and the internet is the backbone
of our modern society. In order to create a startup, web development is needed.
In order to start a club, you need a website. In order to succeed at a
hackathon, web development skills are typically indispensable.

Web Development comes in all shapes and sizes, from API Development to easily
using Artificial Intelligence to connecting people all over the world. Web
Development is far more than just creating a website, and the skills that fall
under the field of web development are an essential tool for anybody looking to
create something cool.

Why then, is Web Development so undertaught in the UC Berkeley community?
Courses like CS 169 (Software Engineering) are typically inaccessible to non-CS
majors and use outdated technologies. Decals like the Web Development and Web
Design Decals teach the basics, but they don't cover the tools that are actually
used in the industry to create beautiful and functional web applications at
scale. Lastly, while there are a few clubs that offer Web Development experience
to students, this experience typically consists of working with real clients,
and these clubs can often require high levels of experience to join.

With all these factors in mind, we set out to create Web Development at
Berkeley's Introduction to Full-Stack Development DeCal, a course where students
with all sorts of backgrounds and experiences with development and design could
come together to learn these fundamental technologies while also learning about
the tools used by professionals, to create meaningful projects that serve as
opportunities to learn, and get the chance to gain real-world experience by
(hopefully) joining WDB as an industry developer or designer, all in a
no-pressure, supportive environment.

We want each and every one of you to succeed and have the ability to build
whatever you want, and to that end, we've created this course :) hope y'all
enjoy it!

:::tip

The course staff cares about one thing - making sure that you can learn and
succeed in this course. Don't hesitate to contact us with any questions or
comments as the course proceeds!

:::

## Syllabus

Before continuing, please look over the [Course Policies](/Syllabus) to
get an idea of how this course is structured, what you'll be learning, and what
our expectations are.

## Important Logistics

1. All materials are on this course website. This includes course readings,
   homework, and projects.
2. All communications will happen on Ed. You will be invited to the Ed
   class if you are enrolled in the course.
3. Read through the [Course Policies](/Syllabus) for information on
   grading, absence policies, and more if you haven't already. _This is
   incredibly important for you to understand how to succeed in this course_.

# What You'll Be Learning

A big part of what's hard upfront is all the terminology people throw around
when talking about programming and web development. Some of it is unavoidable
due to this being a separate field of thought, study, and practice, and then
some of it just people inflating their egos by using esoteric and/or academic
terms to describe something that could be described in much simpler terms.

Some of these words you really need to know (like HTML tags, functions, scope)
and some you can just ignore (like monads and functors.) We'll try to
differentiate that for you. But if there's a word you keep seeing here often or
hear often in the context of what you're studying, it's probably a good time to
go look it up and get a good grasp on it.

Let's fundamentally define what you're going to be learning in this course.

You will learn everything you need to know to create your own website, from back
to front. In order to do this, you will have to learn several "languages." I put
languages in quotes because not all of these are technically languages but it's
a good approximation for now. For now, we're calling them languages. The first
three languages you are going to learn as part of our "basic stack" are HTML,
CSS, and JavaScript.

## The House Metaphor

### HTML - The Frame

Why do you need three languages? Let's make the imperfect metaphor of building a
house. To build a house you need tools (like your text editor, your browser,
your command line.) After you have tools, you need all the building material:
the 2x4s, the shingles, the dry wall, the windows: all the things you need to
put together to make a house. This is the HTML, or hypertext markup language.
However this house thus far isn't going to be very pretty to look and not very
functional. It's not going to have any color or any sort of elaborate
structures. It's going to be bland, inert, and boring.

Likewise, you can create a website that's _just_ HTML but it's going to be a
black-and-white text document with no style or interactivity.

### CSS - The Decorations

In order to arrange, style, and generally make this house more useful, you're
going to have some blueprints. In an overly-reductive way, you could think of
the blueprints as being a set of rules: this 2x4 goes here, that shingling goes
on the roof, this particular wall be blue, and this window goes here. You define
a bunch of rules that dictates that if some item matches this condition, then
some rule is applied to it.

If it is a 9x15 wall, it goes on the south side of the house. This is the CSS of
your house, or the cascading style sheets. CSS is a series of rules that define
that if you are an HTML thing that matches this condition, then apply some style
to it. If you are the first paragraph in an article, your font size is 25px and
your font color is blue.

### JS - The Interaction

Okay, so now we have a well arranged and nice looking house. Now, being the
modern age and me wanting all the gadgets, I want to install a whole slew of
smart home devices. I want it so when I pull in the driveway with my
smart-enabled car that the garage door opens, the lights turn on, the thermostat
turns on the heat, the TV is set to continue my favorite TV show, and the smart
cooker begins cooking dinner.

I am adding behavior to my house; I am adding a layer of programming on top of
what exists. This is like frontend, or client-side, JavaScript. It's adding a
layer of behavior on top of your website. Do you want to pop up a message if a
user clicks a button? Do you want to refresh the stock-ticker on the page so
it's accurate? Do you want to change the picture that's showing on your page
every few seconds? These are things you'd typically do with JavaScript. And like
all the smart home devices, having JavaScript on your page isn't always
necessary.

This website, for example, probably wouldn't need javascript (it's actually just
markdown), but any interactions that you see (for example the scrolling sidebar
on the right or the dropdown menus on the left) use Javascript to add animations
and additional spice to the website.

### Backend - Services

Now, if I want to order delivery to my house, I have to call someone else.
Someone not at my house. I'd use my smart assistant and ask them to call a pizza
place and ask them to deliver pizza to my house. The pizza place in this example
would be like a backend server. One pizza place can serve many houses, and it
probably only does a few things (like make pizza, salad, drinks, etc.) and
deliver that to all sorts of clients.

The clients, in this case, could be different peoples' computers, phones, smart
assistants, smartwatches, smart ovens, who knows!? So one server can service
many clients. In this case, we're just worried about people's browsers (like
Chrome, Firefox, Edge, Safari, etc.) on their computers and phones. While the
frontend code (the smart house stuff) is almost always in JavaScript (there's
stuff like Web Assembly but for the purposes of this course just JS), the
backend code can be in any number of languages: Python, Ruby, JavaScript, Java,
Go, C#, etc.

Today we will only be using JavaScript on both the frontend and the backend so
you don't have to learn two languages, but just know you _could_ use a different
language on the backend.

To recap:

1. The HTML is the structure. It's going to contain all the text, the various
   images tied to the text, and it will generally group things together. Just
   like the drywall in your house, HTML doesn't do anything other than exist. It
   relies on other things to do things for it and to it.
2. The CSS is the blueprint. It's all the rules of what goes where, what color
   it is, what size it is, what font it is, what the decorative background
   images are, like HTML, CSS doesn't *do* anything, it's just a set of rules
   that describe what things go where and how they look.
3. The frontend / client JavaScript is the smart home. It's all the cool
   pre-programmed stuff you can tell your house to do. JavaScript is what can
   change the HTML and CSS to react to various stimuli.
4. The backend code (we'll still use JavaScript) is the pizza place. It's a
   place where we can request things from and it will send back what we ask for.
   Or we can send things to it, like when you upload a new photo to your social
   media account. One server serves many clients, just like one pizza place
   serves many homes.

## Evolution of the Web

### Web 1.0

Web 1.0, also referred to as Syntactic web or read-only web was the first stage
of the internet. The role of the user was static, they could consume information
provided by content producers in the form of HTML and CSS.

This was before the widespread use of Javascript (which was created in 1995) and
since Javascript is what enabled much interactivity, users couldn't actually
interact with these sites.

Today, Web1.0 platforms are still common. Portfolio sites for example, can be
completely static HTML and CSS pages with no interaction.

### Web 2.0

Of course read-only is pretty boring, so when Javascript became more widespread
developers went nuts to provide interaction to websites. Thus, Web2.0, also
known as the Social Web or read-write web was created.

In this era, users can produce content and interact with websites. Today, most
websites like Amazon, Twitter, ore ven this one are Web2.0 websites.

### Web 3.0

I won't talk too much about this one since it's out of scope, but it's basically
the semantic web (read-write-execute) and most commonly associated with
Blockchain. feel free to google more about it.

## The Development of Web2.0

HTML, CSS, and JavaScript are all powerful tools in their own right, and these
are the languages that the entire internet is built on. Try inspecting the
browser `right click → inspect element`. If you go to the "elements" tab at the
top of the inspector, you'll be able to see the HTML, CSS, and some of the
JavaScript for the site you're inspecting!

When Web2.0 first started, people manually wrote HTML, CSS, and JS files,
linking them together and using
[Web API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API)'s to allow the JS to
interact with the HTML.

When you write a webpage, the browser is what actually interprets and executes
your code, rendering the HTML and CSS and executing the JS to make your site
functional. All that you send is the code (today that often bundled and
condensed).

:::info

Every browser decides how to execute your code differently. This means there are
variances between browsers in how rendering and execution is handled, which can
cause some nasty bugs on certain platforms even though the code works fine on
another.

Today, much of HTML, CSS, and JS is standardized by various nonprofit
organizations such as the [HTML Living Standard](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/)
or the
[ECMA Script standard](https://www.ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-262/)
for Javascript.

:::

An example of a basic HTML site is below:

```html
<!-- All of this would be in a file like `index.html` -->
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Page Title</title>
  </head>
  <!-- CSS -->
  <style>
    body {
      background-color: powderblue;
    }
    h1 {
      color: blue;
    }
    p {
      color: red;
    }
  </style>
  <body>
    <h1>This is a Heading</h1>
    <p>This is a paragraph.</p>
    <span id="demo" />
  </body>
  <!-- Javascript-->
  <script>
    // This will set the `span` with an id of `demo` to have the child "Hello Javascript"
    document.getElementById('demo').innerHTML = 'Hello JavaScript!';
  </script>
</html>
```

However, you can quickly see how this can become a mess when having to deal with
tons of interactions. For example, the simple act of "signing up" can involve
over a hundred of lines of vanilla javascript. You have to watch for changes on
inputs, collect these values in Javascript, handle when the user presses submit,
deal with loading states, and deal with response dates (among other things).

Javascript libraries like [JQuery](https://jquery.com/) were built to help this
problem by giving Javascript more power in less lines of code by abstracting
some of the tedious logic behind a library.

Even this wasn't enough, and thus frameworks were born.

Frameworks are tools or languages built on top of HTML, CSS, and Javascript to
expand their power and make them easier to use. Some popular frameworks include
[React](https://reactjs.org/),
[Springboot](https://spring.io/projects/spring-boot) for Java, and
[Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/2.0.x/) for Python.

Frameworks can encompass Frontend, Backend, or even both (fullstack).

As you can see, the web is a series of abstractions around abstractions.
Frameworks are simply abstractions around Javascript which is an abstraction
around the instruction set for the browser to run your code. Pretty neat!

Now that we've introduced the concepts of frameworks, let's talk about the
structure of the course and what frameworks you'll be learning.

### How This Course is Structured

We've structured this course in a linear way that should make sense from a
development perspective.

First, we'll be starting with basic HTML, CSS, and Javascript to give you the
fundamental building blocks for creating websites.

Then we'll make a slight detour to learn more about the design process and UI/UX principles. We believe that this is a
really important step in making a great looking and performing website, so we're covering this
before getting into the advanced building blocks. UI/UX stands for User Interface and
User Experience respectively. UI is essentially the actual design of the site
and what it looks like. UX is how easy the site is to navigate, how the user
feels when they use the site, and essentially all about how
[accessible](https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/topics/accessibility)
the site and the site design is.


After, we'll talk about `Node.js` (Javascript on your local machine) and `npm`
(a package manager for Javascript) and some other common development tools

Next, we'll dive into React.js, a frontend framework created by Facebook and the
most popular one today.

Once you've nailed the fundamentals of React, we'll start to look at Backend
code, learning about HTTP and how to spin up your first Backend server.

With some knowledge of frontend and backend, we'll combine the two and create a
full stack site that reads and writes data to a server.

To persist that data, we'll look at databases (specifically a NoSQL database
called MongoDB) and hook it all together to make a username/password
authentication flow.

Finally, you'll be learning about some more frameworks and other encapsulations of the
concepts you've already learned, stuff that's actually used in industry environments.

Throughout this course you'll be applying your skills by building projects and
websites that you can show off, pretty neat!

:::note

This is the best part about Web Development, a final product that you can show
off to friends and lives permanently on the internet!

:::

# Getting Started

## Tools

Before we get started, we need to set you up with all the necessary tools you're
going to need to get up and going. I use macOS to write code on but nearly
everything I'm going to suggest has Windows equivalents and some have Linux
equivalents as well.

What's important here is that you find what works for you. Every developer has
very strong opinions about their tools and will tell you that is some reason you
_have_ to use their tool. Don't listen to them. Find what works for you. If you
find yourself fighting your tools more than they're helping you, consider trying
something else. Keep an open mind.

What's shiny or popular is not necessarily going to work for you. Take time to
invest in making your tools work the best for you. Small wins amount to huge
boosts in productivity in the long term.

## The Browser

One of your biggest allies in writing websites is the web browser. You may not
be yet aware but your browser has a myriad of developer tools built into it that
help you understand your code, helps you find bugs, and helps you experiment
directly on your running website. All of the modern browsers are great and you
can use any one of them to develop sites with. I recommend you pick one and
really get to know its developers tools.

### My Recommendation: Chrome

[Chrome](https://www.google.com/chrome/)

Chrome dev tools are incredibly powerful, and it's the most-used web browser, so
if it works on Chrome, it'll work for most of your users.

That being said, Edge, Safari, or Firefox are all very, very good browsers with
great dev tools too. If you feel comfortable with one of these already, stick
with it. If you're using Safari,
[make sure you enable dev tools](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/NetworkingInternetWeb/Conceptual/Web_Inspector_Tutorial/EnableWebInspector/EnableWebInspector.html).

## The Editor

One of the most controversial things you can ask a developer is which editor is
the best. There are so many strongly-held opinions that it's hard to tell which
one is going to work for you. There are many flavors and it all depends on what
you want out of your editor: do you want it to hold your hand as much as
possible? Do you want it to get out of the way? I'm going to give you several
choices but let's start with what I've been using.

### My Recommendation: Visual Studio Code

[Download Visual Studio Code](https://aka.ms/visual-studio-code)

Super fast and easy to use, Visual Studio Code has a lot of convenient features
and helpers while being relatively lightweight. It's free, open-source, and
works well on Mac, Linux, and Windows. And perhaps one of the best features of
VSCode is it has a
[huge amount of available plugins](https://aka.ms/vscode-marketplace).

If you're not feeling VSCode, two other editors that are similar in their
offering
are [Sublime Text 3](https://www.sublimetext.com/) and [Atom](https://atom.io/).
Both are great. I used Sublime for CS 61A and still use it for everything I do
with [python](https://www.python.org/). Both are free to download. Sublime has
an unlimited trial that asks you to pay $80 when you can.

If you want a more complete offering, you may investigate using an integrated
development environment (commonly called an IDE.) The reigning IDE for front-end
development is [WebStorm](https://www.jetbrains.com/webstorm/).

WebStorm is a very powerful IDE that has a lot of features and tools built into
it. It aims to be more than just an editor; it aims to be the entire development
suite.

This is my tool of choice and a great integrated solution.

Lastly, I'm going to simply state there are two more tools you could use:
[vim](https://www.vim.org/) and [emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/).
These are tools that you use in the command line / terminal and use _just_ the
keyboard, no mouse. These tools have difficult learning curves, but once you're
productive in them, they allow you to go very fast.

My advice for you is: don't, especially right now as you're learning to code. If
you want to revisit it later then you could do that. But just know that it is
indeed quite difficult.

## The Terminal

You're going to have to learn to use a terminal during this course. It's less
scary than it seems, I promise! There are two things to worry about when talking
about the terminal, and I'll try to help you tell the difference between the
two: the **shell** and the **terminal emulator**. The terminal emulator is the
actual window in your operating system; it itself doesn't execute or understand
your commands you're sending to it. The shell is the code running inside of the
terminal emulator. This shell can be swapped out to whatever shell you want to
run. Unlike the things I recommended above, these various terminal emulators and
shells vary a lot more by operating system.

If this is confusing to you, it's okay. It's a minor detail that you can come
back to later.

For the terminal emulator, it doesn't matter a whole lot which one you use. I
personally use [iTerm2](https://www.iterm2.com/) but you can just as easily use
the default Mac Terminal.app or [Hyper](https://hyper.is/) for Mac. For Windows,
I'm told the aforementioned Hyper also works well as well
as [cmder](http://cmder.app/). If you're on Linux, I'd say just use whatever the
OS's default emulator is.

For the shell, we are going to use [bash](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/).
You don't need to install it unless you're using Windows
([then use these steps to enable it](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10)).
It's 99% already there on your computer unless you're using some obscure flavor
of Linux. Whenever you open your Mac terminal, it'll be running bash by default
unless you've changed it.

There are other options. The reason we use bash is because it is *so prevalent*.
Bash is everywhere. Everything you Google will have the answers written in bash.
My favorite shell is actually [fish](https://fishshell.com/) but it's not very
popular. Another shell people swear by is [zsh](http://www.zsh.org/). These are
all very cool but I recommend looking at these later.

## Trusted Resources

Something really important is that you choose to learn from good sources. Just
like it's important to get your news from quality sources, it's important to get
your technical information from sound sources. Here are some of my personal
favorites:

- For anything to do with HTML, CSS, or JavaScript, Mozilla's
  [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/) is my go-to. I literally have it
  open all the time.
- [CSS Tricks](https://css-tricks.com/) has fashioned itself into a premier
  development website. It has great content not just for CSS but for HTML and
  JavaScript too. If I want a tutorial, I'll head there. If I want more
  technical how-to info, I head to MDN.
- For video content, you really can't beat the content on
  [Frontend Masters](https://frontendmasters.com/). I love it.
- If I'm working with a library or a framework, it's a good idea to head
  directly to their GitHub (we'll talk about GitHub later) page or their
  official documentation. It's best to head straight to the source.

Frontend Masters also puts out a really awesome book every year called the
[Frontend Handbook](https://frontendmasters.com/books/front-end-handbook/2018/).
It's a good way to get an overview of the whole industry.

# Installations and Basics

HTML, CSS, and JavaScript already come pre-installed on your computer, but
there'll be technologies we utilize later in the course that you'll need to
install in order to use. Along with that, you'll be using Github to hold and showcase your homework, so you'll need to set up an account
there.

---

**Contributors**

- [Caelin Sutch](https://www.linkedin.com/in/caelinsutch)
- [Samarth Goel](https://www.linkedin.com/in/samarth-goel-1047b8187/)
- [Brian Holt](https://www.linkedin.com/in/btholt/)
- [Prabhas Kurapati](https://www.linkedin.com/in/prabhask/)
