---
sidebar_position: 4
---

# Final Project Overview

## ðŸŽ‰ Introduction

Well, you made it to the final project, **congratulations!**

We know that it's been a long journey to get here and that there have been many
hardships and trials that you've had to endure on your journey as a student of
web development, but we are confident that you'll be able to create amazing
final projects to be proud of.

The final project is meant to be as open-ended as possible while still having
just enough requirements to ensure that you're able to use everything you've
learned to the fullest capacity and learn along the way. Think of the final
project as something you'd want to build at a hackathon, but spread out over 3-4
weeks. Let your imagination fly, let the wings of your mind soar, and let your
creativity sprout to be able to build whatever your heart desires. After all,
that's why we do what we do here with your web development skills - **we wish to
build**.

Our goal for the decal was to give you all the power to **build whatever you
could think of** - and now is the time to try doing so. Failure at first is
unfortunately essentially inevitable, but we hope that throughout the journey
you will be able to grow as both a developer and as a student.

## Important Dates
* Phase 1: November 11, submit on Gradescope
* Mentor Check in / Worksession: (Optional but highly recommended!) November 16, in Zoom during lecture time
* Phase 2: November 18, submit by having your mentor checkoff
* Phase 3: December 2, submit on Gradescope and present your work

## ðŸ“¦ Logistics

You will be placed in a team of ~7 people with **1 month** to brainstorm,
create, and deliver a full stack project! Your project must include a **design**
component, a **frontend** component, and a **backend** component. Every team
will also be assigned mentors that will help guide you throughout this project
and assist you with any questions that you or your team may have. This project
is split into **3 phases** and is due on **December 2**. You will submit on
Gradescope and connect with your mentor after you are done with each phase. On
December 2, every team will demo their project to their classmates and a panel
of exciting people. After the project is over, every team member will submit a
peer evaluation form.

### Phase 1

Phase 1 is due on **November 11**. This is the **brainstorm** phase. Your team
will decide which members will be doing design, frontend, or backend. Members should not solely do design; it should be spread out amongst all/a subset of members. Your team
must then write some document that defines your **project idea and purpose**,
the **features** you are planning on implementing, and your **tech stack**.

**Project idea and purpose** should outline your project and why you are
motivated to create it. You should also include which team members will be
working on which element of your project.

**Features** should outline what you are trying to implement in your project. Do
you have some feature to share with your friends or view data from some API?
That should all be included here.

**Tech stack** should define which technologies you will be using to complete
your project. The MERN stack is a common example: MongoDB, Express.js, React.js,
and Node.js. Also include any APIs or extra libraries/frameworks you will be
using to complete your project. Additionally, your project must include **at
least one of:** a significant backend or a significant frontend portion.

After you have completed these steps, email or message your mentor and show them
your work to be done with this phase.

### Aside: Tech Stack Requirements

A design component means that you must use at least one of (Figma, Adobe
Illustrator, or any other design tool) to prototype, wireframe, and design your
final project. For the wireframe, it should be **LOFI**, aka low fidelity. We
are not looking for something that's final and very detailed, as long as the
wireframe can convey your project idea and make people understand what you are
doing.

A front-end component means that you must use React/React Native to build your
final project. Feel free to use a component library from the following:
[React-Bootstrap](https://react-bootstrap.github.io/getting-started/introduction),
[Chakra UI](https://chakra-ui.com/),
[Theme UI](https://theme-ui.com/getting-started), and
[Material UI](https://material-ui.com/). Please post on Ed if you would
rather use a different component library not listed. A **significant** frontend
component means that you must use the state feature of React/React Native in a
significant way, which means that it must either be extremely important to the
functionality of your project or worked within a large capacity (in most
projects that use react, the amount of javascript you write heavily outweighs
the amount of JSX and CSS you write). Using Typescript, Sass, or any other extra
technology is also a plus!

A back-end component means that you must use one of (AWS or any other cloud
platform, a database system such as MySQL, MongoDB, etc..., Node.js, Django). A
**significant** backend component would entail working with all of the following
(A database system such as MySQL, MongoDB, etc... (You can use a cloud-based
database such as Google Firebase or AWS DynamoDB), AWS or any other cloud
platform (In a way other than just as a database at the least), and one of
(Node.js, Django)).

### Phase 2

Phase 2 is due on **November 18**. This is the **prototype** phase. Your team
must have **design wireframes** complete and a project repository with working
**prototypes** of any **page components** and **backend files** created.

**Design** members need to complete some mockups of pages or components and
showcase them in Figma or any other design tool.

**Frontend** members need to create some page components that will showcase how
your project will be divided. For instance, in Tic-Tac-Toe, we had a game
component, a board component, and a square component. Come up with a component
heirarchy that makes sense and create these classes/components inside of your
React project.

**Backend** members need to create files in the project repository that outlines
how they are going to create, update, retrieve, and destory data from their
database, as well as how their database is going to be organized. What
information are you storing? Where are you storing it?

We will have a full stack lab on November 16 to help integrate your project's
frontend with your backend. So don't worry about how those two will connect
until then. Just communicate with each other on how the frontend side and
backend side should sync up before then.

### Phase 3

Phase 3 is due on **December 2**. This is the **final** phase. Your team will
complete both the **frontend** and the **backend** and integrate them together.
Your challenge here will be to finish your entire project before the project
deadline. Be sure to communicate with your group members to split up tasks and
work efficiently, and use your project mentors and/or course staff to help you
if you are stuck.

## ðŸŒ  Demo Night

On **December 2** we will have a project showcase/demo night! Every group will
have 5 minutes to present their project to their classmates and a panel of
course staff/WDB members and other industry guests.

## Resources

#### Helpful resources for wireframing

- [How to Wireframe](https://www.figma.com/blog/how-to-wireframe/) (Article)
- [Wireframing Basics](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aqdn7vVKygA) (Video)

#### Helpful resources for architecture diagrams

- [TikTok by Ben Awad](https://www.tiktok.com/@benawad/video/6933584439217769733?lang=en&is_copy_url=1&is_from_webapp=v1)

## Moral Support

**We are here for you!**

This project may seem a little bit scary at first, but you will have all the
support from all the teachers and leadership to guide you through this project.

This is first and foremost a learning opportunity that should be fun! So don't
be afraid to ask plenty of questions (there are no stupid questions here), and
exploit Stack Overflow to your heart's content ~~(as long as there is no code
copying)~~.

---

**Contributors**

- [Emir Karabeg](https://www.linkedin.com/in/emir-karabeg-53ab52196/)
- [Samarth Goel](https://www.linkedin.com/in/samarth-goel-1047b8187/)
- [Kimberley Fan]
